# Minij

## Table of contents

* [About](#about)
* [Recursive Parser (Laboratorio A)](#recursive-parser)
* [Grammar Explanation](#grammar-explanation)
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Examples](#examples)
* [Attribution](#attribution)

## About

A toy implementation of a compiler written in python. The compiler supports a language with a syntax
similar to Java.

The program is a very complete piece of software, as it can not only handle errors generated by the
program itself, but it can also handle external issues such as file management and allocation. In
addition, the program was subjected to a large number of tests.

## Recursive Parser (Laboratorio A)
En esta sección del proyecto se implementó un TDP recursivo.
Este parser hizo uso de la siguiente gramática, la cual fue arreglada según se creyó mejor.
```
Program → Decl Program’
Program’ → Program | ε
Decl → VariableDecl | FunctionDecl
VariableDecl → Variable ;
Variable → Type ident
Type → int Type’ | double Type’ | bool Type’ | string Type’ | ident Type’
Type’ → [] Type’ | ε
FunctionDecl → Type ident ( Formals ) Stmt*|void ident ( Formals ) Stmt*
Stmt* → Stmt Stmt* | ε
Formals → Variable+ , | ε
Variable+ → Variable | Variable Variable+
Stmt → IfStmt | ForStmt | Expr ;
IfStmt → if ( Expr ) Stmt elseStmt?
elseStmt? → else Stmt | ε
ForStmt → for ( Expr? ; Expr ; Expr? ) Stmt
Expr? → Expr | ε
Expr+ → Expr | Expr Expr+
Expr → Expr’ | LValue = Expr’
Expr’ → T E’
E' → || T E' | ε
T → F T'
T' → && F T' | ε
F → G F'
F' → == G F' | != G F' | ε
G → H G'
G' → < H G' | > H G' | <= H G' | >= H G' | ε
H → J H'
H' → + J H' | - J H' | ε
J → K J'
J' → * K J' | / K J' | % K J' | ε
K → New ( ident ) | L
L → - Expr | ! Expr | M
M → LValue | ( Expr ) | this | Constant
LValue → ident | Expr LValue’
LValue’ → . ident | [ Expr ]
Constant → intConstant | doubleConstant | boolConstant | stringConstant | null
```
La forma en que se recuperan los errores en esta fase y según esta gramática es la siguiente:
1. Una vez se haya encontrado un error en alguna de las ramas o en una línea, se prosigue a tomar
los siguientes caminos hasta descartar todas las posibilidades. De la misma forma se agregarán
las palabras esperadas en la posición del token erróneo.
2. Si no se encuentra ningún match en todos los caminos, el analizador procederá a regresar a su raíz
y terminará el proceso recursivo, pero este sigue analizando el resto de los tokens a través de un while
que permite seguir consumiendo los tokens hasta que estos se hayan acabado.
3. Por lo tanto, si se encuentra un error en una línea, se descartará el token en cuestión y se seguirá
analizando, debido a que los tokens continuos a ese dependen del mismo, estos también marcarán error, y
así sucesivamente, hasta que se encuentre un token correcto de nuevo.
## Grammar Explanation

The syntax of the language is very similar to the syntax of Java, which is why the tokens are
practically the same. There are some considerations that you should keep in mind, such as:

* The language is **case sensitive**, such that `if` is a reserved word but `IF` is an identifier.
* All the comments must have an end.
* All the strings must have an end.
* No multiline strings are allowed.

### Reserved words

These are a collection of keywords that are predefined identifiers that have special meaning to the
compiler. They cannot be used in your program.

* void
* int
* double
* boolean
* string
* class
* const
* interface
* null
* this
* extends
* implements
* for
* while
* if
* else
* return
* break
* New
* System
* out
* println

### Identifiers

An identifier is a sequence of letters, digits and dollar sign. It can start with anyone except a
number.

```java
// bad
float 1number = 3.4;

// good
int number1 = 1;
int anotherNumber1 = 1;
```

### Comments

The language supports single and multi line comments. This could be useful to explain parts of the
code and make it more readable.

* For single line comments use `//`.
* For multi line comments use `/*` to start and `*/` to end.

### Constants

* The boolean constants are `true` or `false`.

* A integer constant can be expressed in base 10 or base 16.
    * In base 10 it must be only a sequence of digits from 0 to 9.
    * In base 16 it must start with `0x` or `0X` and be followed by any hexadecimal value.

```java
// bad
int bad = 98.1;
int another = .12;

// good
int base10 = 8;
int anotherBase10 = 012;
int base16 = 0X0;
int anotherBase16 = 0x12aE;
```

* A double constant it must be a sequence of digits followed by a point and:
    * A sequence of numbers or nothing.
    * An exponential notation with the sign of the exponent.

```java
// bad
double bad = 32.1.2;
double another = .12;
double badExponential = .2e-3;

// good
double number = 8.;
double anotherNumber = 3.82;
double exponential = 12.E3;
int anotherExponential = 3.2e-2;
```

* The string constant is a sequence of characters surround by `""`, this cannot contain:
    * A double quote.
    * A new line.
    * Null character.

## Getting Started

These instructions will get you a copy of the project up and running on your machine. If you don't
want to compile it, you can download the
[executable](https://github.com/betoSolares/minij/releases) for your OS.

### 1. Install dependencies

* [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
* [Python >=3.4](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
* [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)

### 2. Get the code

```sh
git clone https://github.com/betoSolares/minij.git
```

### 3.Compile

```sh
cd minij
pip install -r requirements/build.txt
make build
```

These should create a directory called `build` with an executable file inside called `minij`.

## Usage

The program is designed to be run through the command line, if you try to run it through a
GUI you may encounter some errors.

The compiler can receive any plain text file regardless of it's extension and can only work with
one file at a time. After analyzing the file all, all the errors found are printed on the screen
and to a text file with the same name as the input file but with a `.out` extension.

The basic instruction to use the program would be the following:

```sh
./minij <input file>
```

If you need more information about the options you can pass use `minij -h` or `minij --help`

**NOTE** keep in mind that `minij` is the name of the executable file and keep in mind that we are
assuming that the executable file is in the same directory that we are in, if this isn't your case
please use the absolute path to the executable file.

### Examples

```java
/*
  This is a simple hello world in java
  that can be parsed by minij
*/

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("This will be printed");
    }
}

```

More examples can be found [here](https://github.com/betoSolares/minij/tree/master/examples).

## Attribution

You are free to copy, modify and distribute the project with attribution under the terms of the MIT
License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/betoSolares/minij/blob/master/LICENSE) file for more
information.

